Introduction to WAI-ARIA (#531)
solita/solita.github.com: _posts/2024-09-23-wai-aria.md

ARIA includes roles such as `tooltip`, `tab`, and `dialog`. The roles can be divided into six categories: (1) document structure roles, (2) widget roles, (3) landmark roles, (4) live region roles, (5) window roles, and (6) abstract roles. You can find the full list of roles on [MDN](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles).

Many roles have HTML equivalents, so typically there's no need to use `role="article"` when you can use the native `<article>` element. However, in certain cases, assigning a role is necessary. For example, live region roles help alert screen readers to elements that require the user’s immediate attention.

That said, it’s crucial to use `role="alert"` only when the user's immediate attention is genuinely required. Misusing it can disrupt the user experience by diverting the screen reader's focus. Just because you, as a developer, think something is urgent doesn’t mean the end user will feel the same way.

### Attributes

> ARIA attributes modify an element’s state or properties for the accessibility tree. While ARIA attributes primarily affect the accessibility tree, they can also be used to modify the DOM, although this requires additional steps. For instance, you can apply CSS based on ARIA attributes, such as `[aria-hidden="true"] { display: none }`. However, simply adding attributes like `aria-hidden="true"` or `aria-expanded="true"` won’t impact the visual appearance of the page, but will update the accessibility tree. This allows elements to be hidden from assistive technologies or signals that one element controls another that is currently expanded.

Reviewer: One more comment about the correctness of this.

> While ARIA attributes primarily affect the accessibility tree, they can also be used to modify the DOM, although this requires additional steps.

Just by setting an attribute (be it ARIA attribute or not) you are modifying the DOM. You are affecting the DOM in any case, but to get visual changes to the document you will need the extra CSS styles for example.

ARIA is a set of rules and attributes that allow developers to define more refined semantics for different UI elements. Often, when JavaScript is added to user interactions, extra guidance is needed for screen readers and other accessibility tools. ARIA enables the use of non-semantic HTML, though this doesn't mean developers should aim to write non-semantic HTML. ARIA rules and attributes help accessibility tools convey to users what is happening on the page and what interactions are possible.

## HTML vs. ARIA: Which Should You Use?

When comparing HTML to ARIA, ARIA should always be a last resort. **If there is a semantic HTML element available, use that.** There’s no need for HTML like this: `<div role="navigation">...</div>`. Instead, you should use a native HTML element like `<nav>...</nav>`.

Before using ARIA, check [the native HTML elements](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML) to ensure none apply to your situation. A lot can be achieved with HTML alone.

## How to Use ARIA

As mentioned, ARIA consists of a set of roles and attributes. Let's go over what they are used for.

### Roles

> ARIA roles make it possible to describe an element's function in a way that HTML can't. Some HTML elements have default roles. For example, `<input type="radio">` automatically has the role of "radio." Other elements have no role unless one is specifically assigned.

Reviewer 2: > Some HTML elements have default roles. For example, `<input type="radio">` automatically has the role of "radio." Other elements have no role unless one is specifically assigned.

To me, this text was hard to grasp at first. I think it would have been easier for me if it were phrased something like this:

> HTML elements have no role unless one is specifically assigned, except for form elements like `<input type="radio">`.

I'm not sure why it feels easier for me to read. Maybe it's because it is a longer sentence with punctuation and flow? I don't know.

> ARIA roles include `tooltip`, `tab`, and `dialog`. They can be divided into six categories: (1) document structure roles, (2) widget roles, (3) landmark roles, (4) live region roles, (5) window roles, and (6) abstract roles. You can find the full list of roles on [MDN's page](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles).

Reviewer: The first sentence here seems a bit wrong or weird (as it's not a full list). I'd write it like this:

```suggestion
ARIA includes roles like `tooltip`, `tab`, and `dialog`. They can be divided into six categories: (1) document structure roles, (2) widget roles, (3) landmark roles, (4) live region roles, (5) window roles, and (6) abstract roles. You can find the full list of roles on [MDN's page](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/Accessibility/ARIA/Roles).
```

Many roles have equivalents in HTML, so there's generally no need to use `role="article"` when you can use the built-in `<article>` element. However, sometimes assigning a role is necessary. For instance, live region roles can signal to screen readers that certain elements require the user’s immediate attention.

That said, it’s crucial to use `role="alert"` only when the user's immediate attention is genuinely required. Misusing it can disrupt the user experience by diverting the screen reader's focus. Just because you, as a developer, think something is urgent doesn’t mean the end user will feel the same way.

### Attributes

> ARIA attributes modify an HTML element's state or properties, but these changes apply only to the accessibility tree, not the DOM. For instance, adding `aria-hidden="true"` or `aria-expanded="true"` won’t affect the visual page but will update the accessibility tree. This can hide elements from assistive technologies or indicate that an element controls another element that is currently expanded.

Reviewer: Saying it doesn't apply to the DOM is not technically right as the properties and attributes are part of the DOM. I understand what you mean here but it should be written somehow differently.

The ARIA attributes by default don't affect the visual representation of the page unless the page includes CSS that applies styles based on ARIA attributes. E.g. `[aria-hidden="true"] { display: none }`

```
<a href="https://www.solita.fi" aria-label="Solita's website">
  <svg width="46" height="56" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg">
    <path d="M0 56V28h14v28H0zm32-28V0h14v28H32zM16 56V0h14v56H16z" fill="#282828" fill-rule="evenodd"></path>
  </svg>
</a> 
```

The correct way for the SVG:

```
<svg width="46" height="56" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/2000/svg" aria-hidden="true">
  <path d="M0 56V28h14v28H0zm32-28V0h14v28H32zM16 56V0h14v56H16z" fill="#282828" fill-rule="evenodd"></path>
</svg>
```

Any visual element should either be marked as aria-hidden or given a descriptive, context-aware alt-text.

### aria-valuenow, aria-valuemin, and aria-valuemax

For elements like sliders, users can visually infer the range, but those using assistive technologies require more explicit information. Aria-valuenow indicates the current value, while aria-valuemin and aria-valuemax define the allowable range.

```
<p id="x-label">How many [things of X] do you want?</p>
<div
  role="slider"
  id="x"
  aria-valuenow="10"
  aria-valuemin="0"
  aria-valuemax="100"
  aria-labelledby="x-label">
  ...

> </div>

Reviewer: Similarly to the note after the next example, here you could also mention that this could be done with native semantics without ARIA like so:
```html
<label for="x">How many [things of X] do you want?</label>
<input type="range" id="x" min="0" max="100" value="10" />
```
